# Environment

The environment is a body of information maintained by the shell. The body
consists of two parts: the *environment variables* and the *shell variables*.
Shell variables were placed there by the shell (bash or other), the environment
variables are everything else. The shell also stores aliases and shell
functions.

To show the environment variables only:

    printenv | less

To see both the environment and shell variables, as well as defined shell
functions, in alphabetical order:

    set | less

You get a list of variable names and their values.

You can see the value of a specific variable with `printenv`:

    printenv USER

You can also the contents of a variable with `echo`:

    echo $HOME

Aliases are displayed neither by `printenv` nor `set`, to see them:

    alias

Some of the interesting environment variables are:

- DISPLAY  
  The name of the display if we are running a graphical environment. Usually
  this is ":0", meaning the first display generated by the X server
- EDITOR  
  The name of the program to be used for text editing
- SHELL  
  The name of the default shell
- HOME
  The pathname of your home directory
- LANG  
  Defines the character set and collation order of your language
- OLDPWD  
  The previous working directory
- PAGER
  The name of the program to be used for paging output. This is often set to
  `less`
- PATH  
  A colon-separated list of directories that are searched when we enter the
  name of a executable program
- PS1  
  This stands for "prompt string 1", it defines the contents of the shell
  prompt. This can be extensively customized
- PWD  
  The current working directory
- TERM  
  The name of your terminal type. Unix-like systems support many terminal
  protocols; this variable sets the protocol to be used with your terminal
  emulator.
- TZ  
  Specifies your time zone. Most Unix-like systems maintain the computer’s
  internal clock in Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) and then display the local
  time by applying an offset specified by this variable.
- USER  
  Your username.
- HISTCONTROL
  Controls how commands are saved in the history list, you can
  separate the options with a semicolon (`:`). For example, the `ignoredups`
  value causes lines matching the previous history entry to not be included.
- HISTSIZE
  Regulates the size of command history. 

The environment depends on what type of shell session was started. If it's a
*login shell session* (the one in which you are prompted for username and
password, usually happens when you start a virtual console session), first the
`/etc/profile` configuration is applied, then it looks in order for either
`~/.bash_profile`, `~/.bash_login`, or `~/.profile`, whichever gets found is
applied; note that by default `~/.bashrc` will likely be read as well. If it's
a *non-login shell session* (occurs when you launch a terminal session from the
GUI), the `/etc/bash.bashrc` script is applied, then the `~/.bashrc` config,
the session also inherits the environment from the parent process (parent login
shell).

To add directories to your `PATH` or define additional environment variables,
modify `.bash_profile`. For everything else, place the changes in `.bashrc`. 

To apply changes to `.bashrc` to the current session without restarting the
session:

    source ~/.bashrc

You can make a variable available to child processes of the current shell with
the `export` command:

    export PATH

